
Good point, other me! 
‘The Black Archive is TARDIS-proof, he can’t get in there.’ 
Oh McGillop, I thought. Tell the Doctor there’s a wall he can’t climb over and he’ll meet you on the other side. 
‘Oh McGillop,’ Other Me was saying. ‘Tell the Doctor there’s a wall he can’t climb over and he’ll meet you on the other side.’ 
Oh, she’s a clever one. ‘Why are you calling me McGillop?’ asked Other McGillop as their voices faded down the corridor. 
I scrambled out of the cabinet. I knew exactly where I had to go now, because I had a theory, and I had to see if I was right. A little while earlier, I’d found Kate replacing the covering on one of the statues. She’d told me she’d seen nothing of interest under the sheet—but, logically, she should have seen a Zygon under there and I’m pretty sure Kate would have remembered seeing something like that (though she’s always losing her phone, and vouchers). So, theory: that was a Zygon copy of Kate. Question: what was under the covering I’d seen her replace? 
It took me a few minutes to find the right statue. I pulled off the sheet. And oh my goodness, there was Kate! 
She was bound up in horrid, red, rubbery stuff (like string, made of Zygon) and at first I thought she was dead. Then she moaned and I started yanking away at the stringy stuff. 
‘Kate! Oh my goodness, you’re not actually dead,’ I reassured her. ‘That really is tremendously good news,’ I said, to keep the positive feedback flowing. 
‘… Petronella?’ Kate said, so weak. She only called me Petronella when she was stressed. 
‘That’s right,’ I said. ‘Petronella. The Real Petronella, just like you’re the real Kate.’ The red stringy things were snapping quite easily, but I had to be careful because they were holding her up, and I didn’t want her to fall on top of me and cause inappropriate sexual tension in the workplace (which I’m against). ‘Those creatures, they’re Zygons, they can turn themselves into copies of people. But I think they have to keep the original alive, so they can refresh the image, so to speak.’ 
‘Where did … where did they go?’ she mumbled. She was spitting red stuff out of her mouth, which was a bit disgusting. 
‘Tower Base. The Black Archive.’ 
‘What did you say? That’s not possible!’ Her head was almost complete free of all the yucky stuff, and she was trying to focus on me. 
‘It is possible, I’m afraid. They don’t just steal your faces, they take your memories—bit embarrassing when you think about it—so anything you know, she knows. She can access the Archive.’ I broke the last of the stringy things, and Kate collapsed forward. Fortunately I got out of the way, and she was able to hit the floor, uncompromised. 
‘That’s right, you have a little rest down there,’ I said as she scrambled to her feet and started dashing along the corridor. She really is tremendously ace at times. Basically, I’ve always wanted to be Kate. But then some days I just want to be anyone else except me, which is a bit sad when you think about it, so I don’t (except now, accidentally). 
‘If those creatures have got access to the Black Archive,’ she was shouting, ‘we may just have lost control of the planet!’ 
‘Probably best keep your voice down,’ I said, mostly into my inhaler. ‘This place is crawling with them.’ 
‘No it isn’t,’ she snapped. ‘They’ve been stuck in here for hundreds of years and they’ve just disposed of an armed UNIT response team. They’re not going to hang around and play canasta! They’ll already be at UNIT HQ, taking over.’ 
Kate is really very clever about all the military stuff, although she is mainly a science person (and gardening) and she was right (though I would have to look up canasta). The whole place was deserted. By the time we’d got to the top, Kate had called one of her special numbers, and a car came whizzing up, and me and Kate and McGillop all piled inside. (I forgot to mention I went and looked for McGillop when Kate was making the call, but only in case we needed any extra help. I found him under one of the statue sheets, on only my fourth attempt. He was all shivery and his eyes were really wide, but he was unhurt and Kate was basically fine about the tiny delay, and I probably shouldn’t have shouted.) 
‘What are they?’ McGillop kept asking, in the back of the car. ‘What are those things?’ I had my arm round him, but only because I thought he might be about to cry (Irish). 
‘Zygons. You must have read about them, they’re in the files.’ 
‘I haven’t memorised all the bloody files, you know,’ he said, rubbing away tears with his sleeve (which I do sometimes). ‘I’m not like you.’ 
‘Oh, stop it, I did not memorise the files,’ I said. ‘On purpose,’ I added. 
And then he looked at me and started laughing, in a really sort of high-voiced way, and I didn’t know what do. But I held his hand, which seemed to be okay. I don’t think I’ve ever wanted to be McGillop—although he is very popular and has lots of friends, so, maybe a bit. 
The car was very fast (the driver missed a short cut, though, so I took his number to give him constructive feedback later) and we were at Tower Base in no time. But when we got down to the Black Archive, we knew that we were already too late. Atkins, who was always very nice, was sitting outside, as usual, but when he didn’t stand up or say anything, Kate reached out and touched his arm. His head just flopped sideways onto his shoulder and it was horrible. 
I’d never seen a dead person before so I’m afraid I was sick (in a waste bin). When I looked up again, Kate had covered him with her coat. ‘The sad thing is,’ she said, ‘he thought he died on his first day.’ 
McGillop and I looked at each other, and he was as white as a sheet, and I think I was too (though he was trembling more). Kate had taken the spare key from Atkins’s belt and was now unlocking the door. As it opened, we could hear a voice from inside. And it was totally weird because the voice was McGillop’s. 
‘The equipment here is phenomenal,’ he was saying, and they’d got his accent just right, even though it was regional. ‘The humans don’t realise what half this stuff does. We could conquer their world in a day. If I was from round here, I’d say it was Christmas.’ 
‘No,’ said Kate, striding ahead of us, into the Archive. ‘I’m very much afraid you wouldn’t.’ 
McGillop was looking at me. ‘We have to go with her.’ 
‘Do we?’ I asked, which was wrong of me, but I was very scared. 
‘Because she needs you, and where you go, I go.’ He’d taken my elbow, like he was going to guide me into the room. ‘You’re UNIT’s number one tactical asset, remember?’ 
We didn’t seem to be moving anywhere, and his hand on my elbow was shaking so hard. ‘I think you’ll have to push a little bit,’ I said. ‘Or we really won’t get anywhere.’ 
‘I know. I’m trying.’ 
‘Tell you what. You keep hold of my elbow, and I’ll tow.’ 
‘Okay.’ 
We made our way into the room. UNIT’s number one tactical asset, I was thinking. Not really. Not on a good day. Only in the absence of the Doctor. 
EXCERPT ENDS 

FEED CONNECTING FEED CONNECTED FEED STABLE OWING TO THE RESTRICTIONS OF PSYCHIC PAPER WE ARE 


UNABLE TO PRINT ANY OF THE FOLLOWING WORDS: 
… … … … … Oops, hello, sorry! Here you all are, again. Just, reminiscing. I’m an old man, memory is my television. Though, to be honest, so is my television. 
Did you enjoy that one? No, hush, rhetorical. You can all go and write your reviews online, I don’t want you wasting space here. 
Zygon prose is always fascinating, I find. I can’t get enough of picturing those big sloppy red hands wrapped round pencils. Though, in this case, that’s not how it really worked. I’ll explain later, I promise. Unless I forget, or can’t be bothered, or I happen to notice a shiny thing. 
I was just thinking about Alistair again. I do that a lot, because I enjoy smiling. I told him I was thinking of writing this book, of course, and I thought he’d be pleased. Instead he gave a sort of grim nod, and we carried on playing Risk in silence for a bit. (He always got to be the Daleks, which was a bit unfair.) 
‘What’s wrong?’I said eventually. 
‘It’s a security breach,’he said, through his crossest moustache. 
‘It’s not my fault,’Iprotested. ‘You left Italy undefended.’ 
‘No, your book. Your book is a clear breach of security. There’s classified 
material in there.’ 
‘I’ve thought about that,’I said. ‘And I have a clever plan.’ 
He rolled his eyes. ‘Really?’ 
‘I’m going to write “fiction” on the back.’ 
‘Oh, for God’s sake!’ 
‘No, seriously. It will be released as fiction, and sold only in the fiction 
departments of bookshops. That way, everyone will think it’s not true.’ 
‘But it’s not fiction, is it? It’s fact.’ 
‘Fact, fiction, same thing,’I told him. 
‘For God’s sake, no it isn’t!’ He thumped the table with his big, silly fist, and all the little Daleks on the board jumped at once, like they’d had a fright. I think I laughed for five minutes. 
‘Fact and fiction are not the same thing. Please don’t be so ridiculous.’ 
‘Oh, Alistair, think about it. The Universe is vast, and it goes on for a very long time. And do you know what that means? It means that everything that can happen will happen somewhere eventually—that’s the rule. That means every story you can make up, will actually happen one day, somewhere in space and time. The only difference between a factual book and a fictional book is that factual books are written after the event, and fictional books are written before the event. Which makes fiction much more useful, don’t you see? When you’re writing facts, you’re just copying down. When you write fiction, you’re seeing into the future.’ 
We just sat there for a bit, and he did a lot of glaring. I bent down and picked up the Dalek he’d thrown and put it back on the board. He’d got me right on the nose, though I have to admit it’s not a difficult target. 
‘Why do the Doctor Papers exist?’ he asked. ‘Why write up that one adventure? Why not any of the others?’ 
I’d known he was going to ask that question, and I’d slightly dreaded it. ‘To reflect, perhaps,’ I said. ‘Or to remember. The timelines were all tangled, it needed to be set down before it all faded from memory, possibly as a cheat sheet for next time. Though, of course, there’s not a lot of use in a cheat sheet you don’t know you have, because you can’t remember writing it.’ 
I was standing at the window now, looking out over the grounds. Was I hiding my face, I wondered. I didn’t like him seeing me unsure or troubled. 
‘There’s more to it than that, isn’t there?’said Alistair. 
The sun was just starting to set, and a mother was leading a small boy along the path, away from the sad old building. I could hear their feet crunching on the gravel. The boy was clutching the string of a red balloon that bobbed along above them both, as if trying to escape. I stared at the little hand, with the string wrapped around it. 
‘The Doctor had to keep hold,’I said. 
‘Hold of what,’asked Alistair. 
‘The Doctor.’ 
‘You’re not making any sense.’ 
I sighed. How to explain? ‘It wasn’t an adventure,’ I said. ‘It was a day. A day that went on for a very long time, and happened over and over again.’ The boy had twisted round to look back at the building. I thought about all the windows he could see from down there, and wondered if he was thinking about all the people behind them, tucked up in their beds, fading slowly from their lives. I gave him a smile and a wave, to show him it wasn’t so bad, but he just turned to look ahead again, and kept marching away down the path. Quite right, I thought. Get away from here, have a laugh, play a game, make mistakes, and never, ever stop running. Time enough for this place, I thought. Time enough. 
‘What are you talking about?’said Alistair. ‘Not an adventure, a day—what is that supposed to mean?’ 
I looked at the sunset, and pulled myself together. ‘It was the day the Doctor understood who the Doctor always had to be.’ 
Alistair didn’t say anything for a long moment. Then a Dalek pinged off the window next to my head. 
… ah, I’m sorry. Lost in memories, I did warn you. So very old now, hard to keep hold of myself. Where were we? Ah, yes, Chapter 
Five. Written by the Doctor this time. Ah, but which one? Which one? 
Chapter 5 

The Wedding of the Doctor 

‘At first I thought she just fancied me,’ said Clara Oswald, and then broke off. It was beyond strange, she thought. She looked around the three of them: the grumpy old one who seemed to carry the smoke of battle with him; the angry, pacing one, who knew he was cooler than the other two; and her one, who was currently lost in contemplation of his own knuckle joints. As long she’d known him, he’d seemed to view his fingers with a degree of suspicion, and sometimes even jumped when they moved. It was ridiculous, she thought, looking again from one to the other, but somehow you could tell, without even trying, they were all the same man. So different, and yet all so clearly and obviously him. She couldn’t even give them different names in her head. They were just the Doctor, the Doctor, and the Doctor. 
‘Clara, you okay?’ asked the Doctor, and she had to check it was her one. 
‘Yes, sorry …’ 
‘You were explaining about Kate Lethbridge-Stewart?’ said the pacing one. 
‘Yeah, yeah I know.’ She forced herself to concentrate. ‘Okay, so at first I thought she just fancied me, or something. It was honestly weird. Every time I said anything, or even just made a face, I could feel her just looking at me. It was kind of like when someone thinks you’re hot. You know, when someone’s into you? And every time you laugh or speak, or do anything, you can feel their eyes just glom on to you? You know what I mean??’ 
‘Not, I’m afraid, a solitary syllable,’ sighed the Doctor. 
‘I find people always act like that,’ grinned the Doctor. 
‘Yeah, I get that all the time too,’ frowned the Doctor. ‘Especially, when I knock over things.’ 
The Doctor glanced at the other two, with unconcealed contempt, then turned back to Clara. ‘Am I to understand, from that apparently random collection of words, that you thought this Kate person was … attracted to you?’ His face had creased into a sort of fastidious regret, as if these matters had become slightly distasteful to him at his time of life. The other two rolled their eyes and turned away. 
‘Well, yes, I guess.’ 
He nodded. ‘And then you concluded she had to be an alien duplicate. I see.’ 
‘No, I concluded maybe we should get a drink sometime. But when I thought about it, something was wrong. Because when we first met, she’d barely looked at me. So what was different now? People don’t suddenly start fancying you out of nowhere, because you happen to hang around for a bit. Except in romcoms. Written by stalkers.’ A succession of baffled winces had passed over the old man’s face. She suppressed a smile. ‘So when she stepped out for a moment, well, I watched what she did.’ 
‘Good, intelligent work—it’s a delight to meet you, Miss … Oswald, wasn’t it?’ said the Doctor. When he smiled, his eyes almost disappeared in the crinkles. 
‘Call me Clara.’ 
‘Dangerous, but proactive, Clara—I approve. So you witnessed the Zygon transformation. An alarming sight, I know.’ 
‘Bit weird.’ 
‘You are to be congratulated on your bravery and your insight. First class! I needed a few more men like you in the field.’ 
‘Down boy,’ said the other two Doctors simultaneously. 
‘So I ran for it,’ continued Clara, ‘but there was nowhere to go. Then her phone beeped—she’d left it in a sort of dock on the wall—and I saw she’d got a text. A photo.’ She pointed to the numerals the Doctor had carved into the stone. ‘Of those numbers, right there. So I figured it was the activation code for this.’ She held up the vortex manipulator, on her wrist. ‘And boom, here I am.’ She prodded the charred leather. ‘Think it’s blown out, though.’ 
‘Excellent. You have done extremely well. Whichever of these young men is travelling with you, they have made an excellent choice.’ She noticed he was wearing a bandolier round his chest—it suited him, she thought, but one day he was going to wear a bow tie. She glanced over to where that bow tie was now, and saw the face above it was looking at her, smiling. 
‘You okay, Clara?’ he said. 
‘Just getting my head straight. So both of these guys are you?’ she asked him. 
The Doctor glanced at the Doctors. He shrugged and smiled. ‘Yes, I’m afraid so. Previous editions. Captains Grumpy and Swagger. My exes. Well not my exes. But my exes if you see what I mean. We don’t actually know why—’ 
‘I came here tracking a migratory Zygon hive,’ the Doctor interrupted. He was still pacing, faster now, as if his feet were getting angrier by the step. 
‘But according to what you’ve just told us, there are Zygons active in the twenty-first century too. How does that work? They don’t have time travel.’ 
‘You boys seem to have forgotten what the Time War was like,’ snapped the Doctor. ‘Gallifreyan technology got stolen all the time. Plenty of people ended up with time travel, who weren’t supposed to.’ 
‘So!’ said Clara. ‘Three of you in one cell. Three Doctors in one little room —and none of you thought to try the door? Not one of you, not even a little bit?’ 
There was a complicated succession of glances among the Doctors that seemed to suggest they were all about to start blaming each other, before each of them figured out how pointless that would be. 
‘It’s hardly our fault,’ said her Doctor. ‘The door should’ve been locked. Why wasn’t it locked?’ 
‘Because,’ came a clear, high voice, ‘I was fascinated to see what you would do upon escaping.’ They all turned to the doorway. There was a whirl of gold in the shadows beyond it and a flame-haired woman in a blazing dress was stepping into the room. 
Clara stared. There was only one person this could be. 
‘Though you seem remarkably disinclined to go anywhere,’ Elizabeth said, raking them all with a glance. ‘What timidity is this? One recalls a better class of prisoner.’ She skewered the Doctor with a look. ‘What say you, my betrothed?’ 
‘I have standards,’ he said. ‘I only escape through locked doors. And by the way, dear, don’t call me your betrothed. I proposed to Queen Elizabeth, not a Zygon in a big dress.’ 
She stared at him for a moment, then stepped closer to him, examining his face, as if for the first time. ‘I understand you have a fondness for this world,’ she said at last. ‘It’s time, I think, you saw what is going to happen to it.’ She turned and swept out through the door. ‘This way,’ she called behind her. ‘It is dead of night, and something is stirring below England.’ 
Elizabeth led them deeper and deeper into the Tower. She walked at speed through the pitch darkness, never missing a step or a turning. When one of the Doctors had attempted to light the way with his screwdriver, she had snapped at him to switch it off. ‘We do not wish to attract attention. If your feet are unsure in the shadows, follow me—I do not suffer the inconvenience of mortal eyes.’ 
Clara plucked at her Doctor’s arm, and only realised she’d got the wrong one when she heard his voice. ‘Yes, my dear?’ 
‘I’ve been down here before,’ she whispered. 
There was a fruity old chuckle. ‘So you’ve just been telling us—but in fact you haven’t. Technically, you haven’t been down here yet.’ 
‘But this is the way to the Black Archive.’ 
‘No. It will be. The Black Archive will not exist for hundreds of years. We are about to see where UNIT chose to build it. Which raises intriguing questions, don’t you think?’ 
Ahead of them, Clara’s Doctor had been listening. ‘More like the red archive now.’ He was pointing. At the end of the corridor, there was a door; blood-red light spilled round its frame. In front of it, Elizabeth was turning to face them, her hand on the handle. 
‘I suggest you compose yourselves. You are about to see the darkest secret in the Kingdom. Beyond this door, a seed is being planted which, in times to come, will flower into the doom of all England.’ 
She opened the door. 
It was like stepping into a giant mouth. First there was a hot, wet reek, like rotting orchids, then the walls and floor curved round them, pink and wet and alive, like a tongue tumoured with suckers and hanging nodules. The Zygons themselves were barely visible for a moment, slow and silent in the rising steam of their flesh-base, like so many foetuses drifting round a womb. 
Foetuses with teeth, thought Clara, as one of the Zygons turned towards them. Even from a distance, its tiny eyes glittered. As it saw them, its lips drew back in seeming rage—but then its gaze fell on Elizabeth, and it appeared to hesitate. After a moment, it made what could be mistaken for a small bow. 
‘Attend your given tasks,’ commanded the Queen. ‘There is much to be done if England is to be ours.’ The Zygon turned back to its work. 
‘Zygons,’ said the Doctor, straightening his bow tie, as he always did in the sight of the enemy. ‘A whole Zygon hive.’ 
‘Yeah, Zygons, what have I been telling you,’ replied the Doctor. ‘I followed them here, that was my mission.’ 
‘We know all about your mission! Venom sacs in the tongue.’ 
‘Shut up!’ 
They were interrupted by an ill-tempered grunt from the Doctor. ‘The Zygons lost their home world in the first year of the Time War. Perhaps, if we could all stop wittering on, we might receive an explanation as to what they’re doing here.’ 
‘A new home is required,’ said Elizabeth. 
‘So they want this one?’ asked Clara. 
‘Not yet,’ she replied. ‘Far too primitive.’ 
‘Yes, that makes sense,’ grumped the Doctor. ‘Zygons do insist on a certain amount of comfort.’ His mouth creased on the word ‘comfort’ as if the idea was more disturbing to him than conquest. He looked to Clara. ‘So, my dear —the walls, what do you observe?’ 
‘They’re like … flesh, or something. Wet flesh, like this place is made of gums.’ 
‘Quite, yes, very well put. A living support chamber for the Zygons. Once abandoned, however, it will calcify into a shiny black rock-like substance. Ring any bells?’ 
‘The walls of the Black Archive.’ 
‘Precisely, Miss Oswald. They carved their idiot archive out of the sediment of this place. The Black Archive not only contains alien technology, it is built out of it.’ 
Elizabeth was now staring at him, stony-eyed. ‘Old man, why do you treat your current danger as if it were an educational opportunity?’ 
‘Because, ma’am, I have never encountered a danger that wasn’t.’ 
Her eyes narrowed, but she was interrupted as another Zygon came padding over to them. Up close, the smell was overpowering and Clara felt her eyes stinging. The Zygon gave a little bow to Elizabeth and spoke in a scraping whisper: ‘Commander, if I may ask—why are these humans here?’ 
‘I say they should be, therefore they are. Just because I am presently in human form, do not presume to question my judgement, or I shall put out your eyes. As you know, I have already had to do that once today, and I dislike to repeat myself.’ 
‘My profound apologies, Commander.’ 
‘Noted. How many have been processed now?’ 
‘Almost all, Commander. I am the last of the invasion brood.’ 
‘Very good,’ nodded Elizabeth. ‘I will remain with the others to ensure your safety. It is time you too were translated.’ 
The Zygon lowered its head in assent, and Elizabeth placed a hand on its arm, as if comforting it. 
‘Do not fear this strange world you go to now,’ she said. ‘For you will be the commander there, not I. It is my place only to open the door. You shall step through it into glory.’ 
If a Zygon could look moved, this one did. ‘Commander,’ it breathed. 
‘To your mission, brave voyager,’ she said, sterner now. ‘There are humans present, as there will be in the future—you must maintain appearances at all times.’ 
‘It shall be done,’ hissed the Zygon. It began making its way towards the wall behind them. Turning to watch, Clara saw what she had missed before. All the landscape paintings from the Under Gallery were arranged haphazardly round the door through which they had entered, each of them gripped in place by a fibrous sucker extruding from the flesh wall. ‘Landscapes with figures,’ said the Doctor, next to her now. ‘You see? Those are the same paintings we saw in the gallery, but with figures still in them.’ 
‘Not as bad as you made out,’ she said. 
‘Who isn’t?’ 
‘You weren’t.’ She nodded to the old man who was now examining the paintings. 
‘Observe this, Doctor,’ Elizabeth was saying. ‘I believe you will find it fascinating.’ 
The Zygon had stepped towards a fibrous nodule growing out of the floor. The nodule ended in a ring of fingers, which gripped hold of a gleaming, silver sphere. 
The Zygon placed its hand on the sphere. There was a rapid series of clicks, the air around the Zygon seemed to glitch for a moment, and then the whole Zygon simply folded out of existence and was gone. 
‘Well, what do you think? Does my betrothed approve?’ asked Elizabeth, slipping her arm into the Doctor’s. 
‘That’s Time Lord technology,’ the Doctor snapped back at her. ‘Stolen Time Lord technology.’ 
‘And to think, you date these people,’ said the Doctor. 
‘You boys really don’t have memories, do you?’ sighed the Doctor, querulous as ever. ‘As I have already reminded you, lots of our technology got stolen during the war, it was one of the principal dangers. Perhaps if you pair spent less time flapping your hands about and posing dramatically you might develop some kind of useful recall.’ 
‘But where did the Zygon go?’ asked Clara. 
‘Look to the paintings,’ said Elizabeth. 
As Clara looked, one of the landscapes glowed. The lumpen figure of the Zygon was materialising on a hillside. 
‘That’s him? That’s the Zygon, in the picture now.’ 
‘It’s not a picture, my dear,’ said the Doctor, crinkling a smile at her again —the old man seemed to enjoy explaining things to her. ‘It is, in fact, a Stasis Cube. Time Lord art, you see? Frozen instants in time, bigger on the inside. Like a three-dimensional photocopy of a four-dimensional event. But as you can see, you could store living matter inside it too. Though why would you want to?’ 
‘Suspended animation!’ shouted the Doctor. He turned to Elizabeth, who was still wrapped around his arm. ‘Oh, that’s very good. First class. Your Zygons all pop inside the pictures, wait a few centuries till the planet is a bit more interesting, then out they come. Blimey, you lot—you won’t invade anywhere that doesn’t have decent broadband.’ 
‘Yes, yes, yes!’ yelled the Doctor, his hands now whizzing about at each other, as if he were signing an aerial dogfight for the deaf. ‘You see, Clara? They’re stored in the paintings in the Under Gallery, like Cup-a-Soups. Except you don’t add water, you add time. You add time-water to the painting-soup. If you can picture that. Nobody could picture that. Forget I said Cup-a-Soups.’ 
‘Okay, I get it,’ said Clara. ‘Back in the future, when we went to the Under Gallery, the Zygons decided the world was finally worth conquering. Basically the alarm went off, and they climbed out of the paintings.’ 
The Doctor was now disengaging his arm from Elizabeth’s. He looked at her, cold now. ‘Right, well, seeing as that’s all settled, it’s time I told you something,’ he said. ‘Do you know why I know you’re a fake, Queenie? Because the fact is, you’re such a bad copy. It’s not just the smell, or the unconvincing hair, or the atrocious teeth, or the eyes just a bit too close together or the breath that could stun a horse—it’s because my Elizabeth, the real Elizabeth would never have been stupid enough to reveal her own plan. Honestly, why would you do that?’ 
For a moment, Elizabeth said nothing. Then she leaned in a little closer to them all, and lowering her voice, spoke in the sweetest tones. ‘Because,’ she said, ‘it is not my plan, and I am the real Elizabeth.’ 
There was a silence. For the first, second, and third time in his life, the Doctor could find absolutely nothing to say. 
‘So, it would appear that my Kingdom is infested with demons that may steal the faces of mortal men and that England is doomed to suffer their dominion in the years to come; that the man whose proposal of marriage I have just accepted is a spy from another world who believes me to be a demon in disguise; and that the odour of my breath might stun a horse. I am of the firm opinion that this has not been a good picnic.’ 
They were in the Queen’s bedchamber, and Clara was amused at the way the Doctor had arranged himself around the room. The old man sat in a chair at the side, with the air of a presiding dignitary. He glanced around from time to time, seeming either faintly amused or faintly disgusted by everything he saw—except when he looked at Clara, when he always crinkled a smile and nodded. This hated phantom from the Doctor’s past seemed to like her and, to her surprise, she discovered she liked him too. Just as she thought that, he glanced at her and then away again, as if he had overheard her. She knew her Doctor would sometimes take peeks inside her head, and wondered if his previous selves ever did that too. 
The Doctor who had proposed to Elizabeth was striding about the room, agitated, his hands rammed in his pockets, like a sulking schoolboy. Dear God, that man could pace. It was as if every floor he stood on was too hot for his feet. He was issuing a constant stream of explanations and excuses and apologies, which no one seemed to be listening to, least of all him. 
Her Doctor was sprawled on the bed, as if exhausted by the efforts of his previous self, eyes shut, and apparently dozing. She wondered what he remembered of being in this room, twice before. Mostly he seemed surprised by what was happening around him, but now and then she caught him glancing at the others, clearly haunted by a memory. She lay on the bed next to him, with her head propped on her hand, and her eyes kept returning to the remarkable woman who had brought them all here. 
The Queen had arranged herself on the window seat, with the rising sun behind her. Somewhere, a portrait painter was missing a majestic opportunity. 
‘Yes, yes, okay,’ said the Doctor, suddenly opening his eyes, and interrupting the flow of excuses, ‘But you still haven’t explained what happened to the other one. Where’s the Zygon version of you?’ 
‘I was talking!’ said the Doctor. 
‘You still are,’ replied the Doctor. 
‘My twin is dead in the forest—as I believe I told you.’ 
‘You didn’t tell us how she got that way,’ said the Doctor, wriggling up to a sitting position on the bed. ‘They don’t just pop like balloons, Zygons.’ 
‘One begs to differ,’ said Elizabeth. She had produced a dagger from somewhere inside her dress. ‘Whatever a balloon is.’ She flicked a look to the Doctor. ‘I was having a picnic with a strange man, naturally I took precautions.’ 
‘I took sandwiches.’ 
‘My dear, you took a Zygon and here we all are. Once I returned here, the other Zygon creatures never even considered that it was me who survived the conflict rather than their own commander. The arrogance that typifies their kind.’ 
‘What, Zygons?’ asked Clara. 
‘Men,’ said Elizabeth. 
Clara grinned. ‘And you actually killed one of those things. Like, in hand-to-hand combat?’ 
‘I may have the body of a weak and feeble woman—but at the time, so did the Zygon. I was therefore able to take the command of the others, without difficulty—’ 
‘Sorry, wait, wait, wait, wait!’ protested the Doctor, stopping pacing for a moment. ‘You’re saying you just took command of an entire Zygon hive from outer space?’ 
‘Whatever their aspect, they are soldiers. Like all soldiers they have the character defect of obedience, which they mistake for the higher purpose of duty. It is easy to command those accustomed to orders. In many ways it is a kindness.’ 
‘But from outer space,’ he repeated. 
The Doctor was now chortling away on his chair. ‘I did notice, your Majesty, that they appeared to have taken up bowing. Haven’t seen Zygons do that before.’ 
‘I confess that was my innovation.’ 
He laughed even harder. ‘Your Majesty, I am greatly looking forward to meeting you.’ 
Elizabeth glanced briefly at him; then she looked again, harder. She pointed to the gleaming sphere that rested on the writing desk next to where the Doctor was sitting. ‘That is from the Zygon lair.’ 
‘Yes, your Majesty. I stole it as we left.’ He picked it up and tossed it in his hand. ‘It belongs to my people. A family heirloom, you might say.’ 
‘But when did you steal it? I saw nothing.’ 
‘With respect, your Majesty, that is what you may expect to see when I steal something.’ 
She narrowed her eyes. ‘Your arrogance is familiar,’ she said, then rounded on the Doctor, who was still reclining on her bed. ‘As is yours, sir—you help yourself to the comforts my bedchamber, as if you belong here. I feel there is something of importance I am failing to perceive.’ She looked around the three men with a gathering frown. 
‘Okay,’ said Clara, to break the silence. ‘But if you’re in charge of the Zygons, why didn’t you just order them off the planet, or something?’ 
‘That would have been unexpected, and therefore questioned. One should not stimulate one’s enemies into thought, while in the midst of a deception. In any event, the greater number of them were determined to put themselves inside those strange pictures, where I understand they intend to remain for many hundreds of years. I encouraged haste in this project, in the knowledge that we would be safer with them gone. I have resources enough to dispose of the few that have stayed behind.’ 
‘No, no, no!’ said the Doctor, ‘Come on, I know you, you’ve tortured me. You don’t dispose of people! Those creatures are stranded here, you have to find a way to make peace.’ 
‘The only peace they will find on English soil is underneath it.’ 
‘No, I forbid this—’ 
‘You forbid it, sir? Be less bold. Your eyes are pretty enough where they are, and I have a sufficiency of earrings. Henceforth please try to remember —’ her voice rose to a bellow—‘I am in charge here!’ 
For a moment it seemed to Clara that the windows rattled. Then, in the silence that followed, Elizabeth refolded her hands in her lap, and her smile resumed its former sweetness. 
‘Hang on. Eyes,’ said Clara. ‘Downstairs you said you’d put out a Zygon’s eyes …’ 
‘It was a disciplinary matter, I had to behave as their commander.’ 
‘That’s what Zygons do?’ 
‘I have no idea, I was forced to improvise.’ She turned her gaze on the Doctor. ‘Can I expect you to do your duty, beloved?’ 
‘Depends on what you think my duty is.’ 
‘I will deal with the Zygons that remain here, and arrange for the paintings to be locked away, where they may do no harm. You will travel to the future and deal with whatever devilry they intend to unleash, upon emerging.’ 
The Doctors exchanged glances, clearly worried. ‘I may be a dab hand at a picnic,’ said the Doctor, at last, ‘but who said I can travel in time?’ 
‘You did. You have made many flippant remarks about other times you have visited. Flippancy is so often a concealed truth flaunted by an over-confident man. And I seem to be surrounded by three of those.’ She now rose to her feet. ‘Doctor!’ she said to the man on the chair. ‘Doctor!’ she said to the man sitting on the bed. ‘And Doctor,’ she said to the man, now staring back at her astonishment. ‘The future of my Kingdom is imperilled. Can I rely on your service?’ 
‘You’ve let this place go a bit,’ grouched the Doctor as he entered the TARDIS with the Doctor. 
‘It’s not my TARDIS, it’s his one,’ replied the Doctor, nodding to the Doctor, who was racing round the console, slamming levers, and powering up. ‘I’ve refurbed a couple of times since this version,’ he went on. ‘Dumped the coral, went a bit metal, you’ll love it.’ 
The Doctor grunted in reply. ‘There better be more round things,’ he muttered. 
Elizabeth had lost no time in making the necessary arrangements. The TARDIS had been transported from the forest, where it had been parked for several months, and after a brief ceremony, the Queen had sped them all on their way. ‘England depends on you. Remember your promise, Doctor!’2 

‘So where are we going?’ asked Clara, as the TARDIS roared into life. ‘The Black Archive? Because there’s a Zygon in there right now. Well, right then. Well, in a few hundred years.’ 
The TARDIS lurched and they all grabbed on to the console. 
‘Unfortunately,’ said the Doctor at the controls, ‘the Black Archive is the one place on Earth we can’t go.’ 
‘But I thought the TARDIS could go anywhere.’ 
‘Anywhere,’ he replied, ‘except the Black Archive.’ 
The Doctor found himself a chair at the side of this disgracefully grubby version of his TARDIS—really, was a quick dab with a sponge out of the question?—and contemplated the two boys, racing around the console, squeaking and bouncing like cartoon boffins. Really, he kept thinking. Those? 
One of them was wittering on about phasing the TARDIS through the sub-dimensions, and the other one was disagreeing, because they’d be better off adapting the chameleon circuit, but none of it was worth listening to. Nothing would suffice, the Doctor knew. For these boys, the Time War was too long ago. They’d forgotten that TARDIS-proofing worked. 
He sighed. Why had the Moment brought him here? What was the purpose? Seeing his future had changed nothing about his predicament. Soon he would have to return to the barn, and commit mass murder, and end the war. And then, apparently, he would descend into his second and third childhoods. Nothing had been altered by this visit, except that he now understood that he was doomed to survive. 
The Doctor frowned. And yet something had changed. Something inside him was different now, but for the moment he couldn’t quite put his finger on what it was. 
‘Why can’t the TARDIS get into the Black Archive?’ asked Clara. She had joined him, sitting on the arm of his chair, and seemed equally bemused by all the jabbering around the console. ‘Kate said the Tower was TARDIS proofed, or something. Well, Zygon Kate.’ 
He looked at her for a moment. Splendid girl. He’d found himself glancing inside her mind, from time to time, which was an atrocious habit, of course, and one he would have to cut out. But there was something almost familiar about her, as if they were already fellow travellers. ‘Fear makes companions of us all,’ he said, aloud, and she frowned at him. 
‘What do you mean?’ 
‘Sorry, my dear, I don’t know why I said that. Something in your voice brought it to mind. I’m an old man, my memory is a terrible jumble.’3 

‘Not as old as you’re going to get,’ she said, glancing at the other Doctors. 
Or as young, he thought, then remembered she’d asked him a question. ‘In the Time War, many species became adept at proofing themselves against the intrusion of a TARDIS—it’s easier to scramble the engines than you’d think. The Zygons were particularly good at it.’ 
‘And the Black Archive was built inside the remains of the Zygon base!’ 
‘Just so. Their reasoning seems clear. They wanted to avoid the attention of the Beverley Sisters over there’—he nodded towards the other Doctors 
—‘who most certainly would not approve of them stockpiling alien technology.’ 
‘I’m not an expert,’ replied Clara, ‘but weren’t there three Beverley Sisters?’ 
‘I feel you are making a point, but I’m afraid it is eluding me.’ 
‘Then I’m not making it very well. So there’s no way we can get into the Archive?’ 
‘Oh, but we have to, my dear. The Zygons are in there, they must be stopped.’ 
‘But you just said we can’t get inside.’ 
‘Can’t?’ twinkled the Doctor. He held up the silver sphere he had taken from the Zygon lair. ‘No such word as can’t,’ he grinned. He got to his feet, and approached the other two, who now seemed to be tearing the console apart. 
‘This wiring’s a right mess, you should sort it out,’ Bow Tie was complaining. 
‘Well, apparently I’m going to.’ 
‘Yeah, leave everything to me.’ 
‘Well that is roughly what’s going to happen.’ 
‘Gentlemen,’ interrupted the Doctor. ‘Enough of this chatter. We can’t beat the TARDIS-proofing, but there is another way.’ He tossed the silver sphere in his hand. ‘Cup-a-Soup!’ He frowned. ‘What is Cup-a-Soup?’ 
‘What are you on about?’ demanded Bow Tie. 
‘Isn’t it time,’ said the Doctor, ‘that we our turned our enemy’s choice of weaponry against them? That is our M.O., is it not? We are the Doctor, after all.’ 
His ears hummed, the blood stood still in his veins, and he nearly dropped the sphere. That was it! That was what had changed! But when did he start 
doing that? When had he started calling himself the Doctor again? 
‘You got an idea?’ Daddy’s Suit was asking. 
‘Share with the class, why don’t you?’ said Bow Tie. 
He could feel it inside himself. It had all come back, like it had never been away. He was ready to ride to the rescue, make some jokes, nick some stationery and trick the monsters into their own traps! He had looked the other way, and left a door open; and in that moment, look who’d snuck back in. He was the Doctor again. He should have been outraged, of course, but someone somewhere had started laughing, and to his astonishment, he realised it was him. 
‘Have I missed another funny thing?’ asked Daddy’s Suit. 
‘Seriously have you got a plan, Grandad?’ 
‘A plan? Yes, I’ve got a plan! Of course I’ve got a plan! I’ve always got a plan, I’m the Doctor. But I should warn you, boys,’ he said, and wondered if the smile on his face would ever stop growing, ‘it’s a little bit timey-wimey!’ 
And he started to roar with laughter again. The other two stared at him, clearly thinking he’d gone mad, but he didn’t mind a bit. Because in that wonderful moment, spinning through time and space in the TARDIS, with the Doctor and the Doctor and Clara Oswald, there was exactly one thought going round and round in my head. 
Doctor once more! 
FEED CONNECTING 
FEED CONNECTED 

FEED STABLE 
PLEASE STORE THIS BOOK IN THE CLOSED POSITION TO STOP THE WEEPING ANGELS CLIMBING OUT. 
So what are we to make of that? Perhaps the hottest topic in Doctor scholarship (or, more likely, perhaps not) is this: did the Doctor marry Elizabeth I? What was the nature of the ceremony he so briefly alludes to? Was he his own best man? Did he also give away the bride? Obviously by now you’ve read the Doctor’s Best Man speech in Chapter Nine—yes, you did, I’m sorry, settle down—and while it is extremely funny, extraordinarily moving and even revealing in quite unexpected ways (Susan!), it’s possible, I suppose, that it’s a fake. So what concrete evidence do we have for history’s least likely union? 
There is considerable doubt about how much time the three Doctors and Clara Oswald spent in Elizabethan England, before setting off on their mission to the future. You might suppose they were in a hurry, but since their transport was a time machine, time itself was not an issue. So did the Doctors linger and, more importantly, did the Doctor dally? 
Many have pointed out that something must have happened, because the Doctor is clearly being evasive when it comes to the ‘ceremony’ and the exact circumstances of his departure. One cannot avoid a subject unless there is a subject to avoid. There is also the issue that Elizabeth addresses him as ‘husband’in her letter of instruction. 
For many, it is beyond doubt that the Doctor is lying, but consider: this doesn’t necessarily mean that the marriage ever happened—only that the Doctor believed it did. 
Consider also Elizabeth: a woman of immense accomplishment and intelligence, used to manipulating the many egos competing for her attention. Is it possible that she could have faked a secret wedding ceremony, just to tether the Doctor to her service? 
We may never know for sure, of course, but I have my suspicions, and once I shared them with an old friend. Miss Clara Oswald often pops round for tea these days. I know her of old, though I like to pretend I can’t remember why, and she is happy to play along with that. I asked her once if the Doctor, a Time Lord of renowned intelligence and insight, could really have been so easily bamboozled, even by Elizabeth. 
‘Yeah, I know what you mean, but trust me on this,’ Clara said, ‘she was a phenomenal kisser.’ 
Our next chapter, Dearest Petronella, is in the form of letter. The circumstances of its composition will be clear in the reading. 
Chapter 6 
Dearest Petronella 

Dearest Petronella, 

Hello you. Or Hello me. It’s Petronella here. By the time you read this, I think, you’ll be about to abandon your human form—but I wonder if you would mind waiting just a little? Could you read this letter, while you’re still me? There’s something I want to explain. 
We have so many memories in common, don’t we? All my life in your head. How embarrassing! But let’s not dwell, you know all the stuff I’m talking about. Your face will be red enough when you’re back to Zygon. Oops, shape-shifter humour, right? But just between us girls. 
If you are a girl, really? Are you a girl? Are Zygons girls and boys like we are, or just all the same? I think all the same would be so much better. Think of the bathroom-space we could save. Honestly, what the human race could have achieved if we didn’t have to double up on plumbing! 
Anyway—drifting, drifting. You know me. Well, gosh, you really do know me, don’t you? No one’s ever known me like you do. Which is sort of the point of this letter. 
As I write, you’re still unconscious. It’s funny, looking at you, because one thing you never see in the flesh is what you look like asleep. There’s no drool, which is a relief, but you’re snoring a bit. I keep apologising on our behalf, which is a bit weird, but I had no idea I was so loud! 
You-know-who says the effect might take longer to wear off for you lot, because you’re shape-shifters, and a bit more complicated. Also, your memory of what happened might not fully restore, because … well, you’ve got twice as many memories as any of us. All mine on top of all yours. 
So in case you’ve forgotten what went on in the last few hours, and what we said to each other, here it all is. From my point of view. Which, for now, is your point of view too. 
RECAP. (I love those, don’t you? Well, I KNOW you do.) 
So we’d just found Atkins dead (very hard to forgive, sorry to mention) and Kate had gone striding into the room, because she always does that—you know, I think I want to be Kate the most—and McGillop had taken hold of my elbow, to be protective. Unfortunately, he couldn’t move his legs, because of all the terror, so I had to sort of pull him forwards, while he kept protecting my elbow. 
END OF RECAP. 
As we made our way through the door, I could hear Kate talking. 
‘I am not armed. Neither are the two people now entering the Archive. It is against our code of conduct, and our inclination, to initiate any harm against an off-world visitor, and if you doubt my word on that, please consult the memories you have downloaded from my head.’ 
We could see them now. Kate was standing in the middle of the room, opposite an exact duplicate of herself. That was freaky enough, but behind her was another McGillop, and next to him there was … well, you. Or me. Or you/me. You turned and saw me, and you gave me a weird kind of look, but I couldn’t tell what it meant. Then I realised something. No one ever learns to read their own face, do they? 
The real Kate looked over her shoulder. ‘Petronella, I want you to lock the door please. No one must come in.’ 
She was calling me Petronella! That wasn’t a good sign! She’d left the key in the door, so that was easy enough, but my hands were shaking so badly it took me ages. McGillop tried to steady my hand, but he wasn’t any better, and we just rattled away together like a drinks trolley during turbulence. Behind us, I could hear the other Kate replying. 
‘Having downloaded your memories, I’m also aware of the resident population’s general attitude to visitors. You have enough difficulty with your own species, let alone ours.’ 
‘If I may point out: you are invading.’ 
‘My Zygon duplicates are already taking command of UNIT. The invasion is nearly over.’ 
‘With the weaponry in this room, you would be unstoppable.’ 
‘I agree.’ 
‘So I regret to inform you that you are about to be stopped. You don’t mind if I sit down?’ There was a meeting table, right in the middle of the room, and Kate just pulled out a chair and sat down. She smiled at her double, and waved her into the seat opposite. 
Copy Kate didn’t move for a moment. ‘You are not armed. We are Zygons —we were born armed. This room is ours, therefore so is your planet.’ 
Kate just shrugged. ‘Technically, the planet is yours, yes. I hope you enjoy your reign, as you’re going to be dead in a little over five minutes. Please, do have a seat.’ 
Copy Kate was frowning now, and I knew that look; somehow control was slipping from her hands. After a moment, she pulled out a chair and sat opposite Kate. Then the other McGillop moved into position at her shoulder, and then you came and stood at her other shoulder. It was like a movie poster about a family business or the mafia (or cross TV presenters). 
McGillop and I looked at each other. Oh well, we thought, and we went and stood in exactly the same positions behind the real Kate. It was all very scary, but it was kind of ridiculous too. Movie posters facing each other. 
I glanced at you, wondering how you were feeling, and you were already looking at me, and it was so funny, because at the exact same moment we both made the big wheezy noise. We reached for our inhalers, but of course only I had one. I hope I didn’t look too smug, but I think I probably did. 
Kate was speaking again. ‘If you search the memories you’ve taken from me, you will realise there are protocols protecting this place. The weaponry in this room cannot be allowed into your hands, or we will lose control of our own planet. Osgood?’ 
This was my bit, though I wasn’t looking forward to it. ‘In the event of alien incursion, the contents of this room are deemed so dangerous it will self-destruct in—’ My mouth just gummed up! I couldn’t say it! 
Kate had her phone out, and she clicked something. On the wall, big red numbers lit up. I looked at them, but I was so scared, I couldn’t make sense of them. They just sort of jumbled about in front of me, like my eyes were jumping up and down. 
‘Five minutes,’ Kate said. 
Copy Kate had her phone out too, and was looking at it. We were all about to die, and suddenly all I could think was, how could she have a phone? Did Zygons copy phones too? Was that a phone made of Zygon? Active hologram shell, I thought. Good theory, I thought, impatient with myself, but never mind that now. 
‘This is some of the most sophisticated powerful equipment in in the seven galaxies,’ Copy Kate was saying. ‘Your explosives would barely scratch it— oh!’ 
‘Exactly,’ said Kate. ‘I see you’ve just remembered that there’s a nuclear warhead twenty feet beneath us. Are you sitting comfortably?’ 
‘You would destroy all of London?’ 
‘To save the world? Yes, I would.’ 
‘You’re bluffing.’ 
‘Do you think so? Somewhere in your memory is a man called Brigadier Alistair Gordon Lethbridge-Stewart.’ I couldn’t see her face from where I was standing, but I knew she was doing that smile. ‘I’m his daughter.’ 
Copy Kate narrowed her eyes, like it was the annual performance evaluation, and leaned back in her chair a bit. She was drumming her fingers on the table now. Then she smiled. ‘So am I,’ she . 
This is mad, I thought. This is ridiculous, and pointless. 
‘Then I fear we have an impasse,’  Kate. 
‘Not for long,’  Copy Kate. 
This will destroy everyone, I thought. They will murder millions. Us too! 
What? What did I mean, us too? Why was I thinking that? Except, hang on, I wasn’t thinking that! Those thoughts were just popping into my head. But where from? 
Of course, that’s when I looked across the table and saw you. And you were staring at me through your funny big spectacles. How can you have spectacles, I wondered. Were the spectacles made of Zygon? 
I told you—active hologram shell. 
Oh, that was you? 
Of course it was me. 
We’re still linked then? Psychically? 
I reopened the connection, yes. 
You can do that? 
Not normally. This is different.
 
Why? 
Because I was able to figure it out. Your brain is amazing, Petronella. I’ve 
never been anywhere so huge. 
Seriously? You like it? 
I love it. How do you cope, though? All these thoughts! It’s like chasing a 
herd of ponies. 
I love ponies. 
I’m aware. Shall we return to the end of the world? 
Oh, okay, yes, sorry. 
Copy Kate was speaking. ‘The order can be cancelled, of course. One word from you would stop the detonation.’ 
I glanced to the counter on wall, and so did you. Oh God! We had three minutes. 
‘Quite so.’ 
‘Keyed to your voice print.’ 
‘And mine alone.’ 
‘Not any more,’  Copy Kate. ‘Cancel the detonation,’ she shouted. 
‘Countermanded!’ 
‘Cancel the detonation!’ 
‘Countermanded!’ 
Copy Kate stared at herself. She was shaking her head. ‘We only have to agree to live.’ 
‘Agreed. All you have to do is surrender all your troops to mine.’ 
‘Never!’ 
‘Then we can only agree to die.’ 
They were both on their feet now, staring at each other. Kate was the most stubborn person in the world; she never backed down from anything. That stubbornness had saved so many people, so many times, but now she was face to face with herself. Unstoppable force meets immovable object, I thought; then realised that was from you. 
You were looking at me again. Do you think he’s got a plan, you asked. 
Who? 
Who do you think? 
The  can’t even get in here. 
You shook your head. Tell the  there’s a wall he can’t climb— 
—and he’ll meet you on the other side, yes, I know. But how could he do 
it? 
Look over my shoulder, you . 
When I looked all I could see was a painting propped against the wall. No, hang on, not just any painting. It was the Gallifrey Falls painting from the National Gallery. The one we’d shown to the  just a short time ago. 
But what’s that doing here, I asked. It can’t be moved, except on the specific orders of Kate Lethbridge-Stewart. 
Or the , you reminded me. 
But when could the  have done that? I asked. 
You glanced at the Copy McGillop, and I noticed he was staring at me too. We’ve copied your colleague, McGillop, you explained, so we’ve got all his memories as well. We’re going to send you a memory graft of something that happened a few hours ago. 
Copy McGillop was staring and staring at me now, and I was about to ask what a memory graft was when— 
I was back in the National Gallery, when we’d shown the painting to the  and Clara for the first time. It was all exactly the same, except I was standing in a slightly different place, and my mouth tasted a bit funny. I was feeling a tiny bit hungover (hang on, I don’t drink) but I was still looking forward to seeing Angus and Ferdinand that evening—except I didn’t know who Angus and Ferdinand were. And then I realised! I was McGillop. I was standing inside his memory. This was a memory graft, and I was him. And oh my! Everything was so different! Even colours and smells and the feel of my feet on the floor—nothing anywhere was the same. When I looked at the , he wasn’t called the  any more, he was called Git-In-Bow-Tie. When I looked at Clara Oswald she was suddenly Bossy-Munchkin. When Kate started talking she was Cheer-Up-Dear. Then I was having a big sad thought, and thinking (in an Irish accent), ‘Oh she can’t take her eyes off him, can she?’ I didn’t understand that at first—who couldn’t take their eyes off who?—and then I found I was looking at myself, and, yes, I was staring at the . And goodness me, all of a sudden I was called Princess. 
Princess? Why was McGillop calling me Princess? I had a quick look round his memory—gross!!—and there was simply tons of me in there, and I was always called Princess! Didn’t he know I was against all constitutional monarchy (except Prince Harry)? Mind you, I had to admit, he wasn’t saying it in a mean way. He was saying it in a nice way. Actually, a very nice way. I didn’t quite know what to do with myself. I’d have blushed if I’d had my own face. Did this mean he liked me? At the exact moment I asked myself that question, I realised I was looking at my bottom. 
No, no, no, I thought! Oh, McGillop, cut that out. It was going on and on, and frankly it was embarrassing. 
Git-In-Bow-Tie had just finished the Queen’s letter. ‘What’s happened?’ There was quick glance over to the  as he spoke, then whoosh, back to my bottom. 
‘Easier to show you.’ A quick glance at Cheer-Up-Dear, then whoosh, bottom! Oh, control yourself, McGillop! Was this what had been going on all these years? Was he objectifying me every time I turned my back (which seemed to be a requirement, in fact)? 
Thankfully, my phone rang—no, I mean McGillop’s phone rang. A familiar voice , ‘Take a look at the number on your phone, and confirm who you’re talking to.’ 
The phone screen  that the  himself was on the line. But how was that possible? I—no, McGillop—glanced at Git-In-Bow-Tie who was walking right past him, following Cheer-Up-Dear out of the room. Now Princess followed right behind him. Whoosh, bottom! Oh, McGillop! What 
did he think I kept back there? 
‘But that’s not possible, sir,’ McGillop was saying. ‘He’s right here.’ 
‘Yeah, I know I am, I remember,’ replied the  on the phone. ‘I’m a time traveller, figure it out. I am currently in flight, in the TARDIS, and I need you to get the Gallifrey Falls painting sent straight to the Black Archive. Priority Buffalo One. And tell absolutely no one this has happened.’ 
‘Understood, sir.’ 
‘Not even me. Do you still understand?’ 
‘Why am I doing this, sir?’ 
‘Because the future of Planet Earth depends on it,’  the  and the 
line went dead. McGillop look down the corridor, where he could still see us 
walking away, and whoosh— 
I was back in the Black Archive. I looked at the counter. I’d been gone for 
less than a second (well, not really gone, but you know what I mean). 

‘All you have to do is leave this planet,’ the real Kate was saying. 
‘Fine, we’ll go. But we’re taking all this equipment,’  Copy Kate. 
‘So you can burn us up from space?’ 
‘No, to stop you shooting us down as we leave.’ 
‘We won’t.’ 
‘You’ve done it before. Why should we trust you?’ 
‘You invaded us. Why should we trust you?’ 
‘We have a problem, then.’ 
‘A mutual problem.’ 
‘But not for much longer.’ 
‘For exactly a hundred and nineteen seconds, I fear.’ 
‘I fear also,’  Copy Kate, with the saddest smile. 
I looked at you. So it was the  who moved the painting here, I . 
Are you thinking what I’m thinking? 
By definition, you . If the  has found the ability to place himself inside the painting— 
Do you remember that you never finished that thought? There was the most tremendous sound of shattering glass and the front of the painting exploded into the room. The air was suddenly filled with a strange, screaming, zooming noise, which made you scared just to hear, followed by a low drumming thunder, so deep you could feel it in your tummy, and then a spinning blue tunnel blasted like the beam of a searchlight through the picture frame, swirling and howling as it filled the room. I shaded my eyes and looked down the tunnel. I could see, silhouetted against the kaleidoscope of tumbling blue shapes, three men striding out of the painting, towards us. 
I have the most stupid feeling that there might have been a tear in my eye, which you probably think is silly (or maybe you don’t, of course, being me). But, you see, I knew what it meant. It’s hard to describe, but I knew, even then, that everything was going to be absolutely fine—like it was suddenly Christmas Day, and Santa Claus was landing on the roof. I also knew I wasn’t UNIT’s number one tactical asset any more. 
We were no longer in the absence of the ! 
Do you remember any of it, Petronella? I think it will start getting tricky now, because of what the  did to us all. But I hope you can remember those three men climbing out of the painting and just striding into the room. I knew, straight away, they were all the . I’ve studied him all my life, but that wasn’t the reason: you could just see it somehow. The  and the  and the ! 
There was the one we met today, all goofy and adorable, with his bow tie and swirly hands. And there was the one with the tight (!!) suit and the Converse. My mum saw a photo of him once, and told me that she would (which was a bit gross, wasn’t it?). And there was another one I’d never seen in any pictures. The mysterious extra ! It was like finding a secret Top Trumps card that no one else knew about! He was very different from the other two. Sort of older and more crumpled. When he looked at you it was like he was grand and frail at the same time. It was still him, though, there just wasn’t any doubt. He wore a bandolier round his chest, which I thought would be difficult to replicate, so I’d probably be hitting the antique shops. 
‘Hello,’ they all . 
‘I’m the .’ 
‘I’m the .’ 
‘I’m the .’ 
Honestly, I could hear my tattoos cheering (apologies for those, by the 
way). 
‘Sorry about the mess,’  the old one. 
‘And the showing off,’  a voice. I looked round to see Bossy Munchkin 
Clara Oswald climbing out of the picture too. 
‘Kate Lethbridge-Stewart, what in the name of sanity are you doing?’   Bow tie. (He  it to the wrong one, but I suppose when there’s three 
of you in the room, you stop worrying about that sort of thing!) 
‘There’s a protocol for when this place is breached—’ began real Kate. 
‘I know all about your idiot protocol,’   Converse. ‘I just never 
thought anyone would be idiot enough to activate it.’ 
‘The countdown can only be halted at my personal command, there’s nothing you can do.’ 
The s all looked to the numbers on the wall. We had a bit over a minute. I’d read every file there ever was on this man—I knew he’d keep going to the last second, just for dramatic effect. 
‘I’ll tell what we can do about it,’   Converse. ‘We can make you 
both agree to halt it.’ 
‘Not even for three of you,’  Kate. 
‘You are about to murder millions of people,’ snapped  Old. 
‘To save billions more,’  Kate. ‘How many times have you made that 
calculation?’ 
‘If you’d never had this stupid, dangerous collection in the first place—’ 
‘Irrelevant!’ shouted Kate. ‘I repeat: how many times have you made that 
calculation?’ The s all looked at each other, and there was something awful in their faces. 
‘This is not a decision you will ever be able to live with,’   Converse. (When he  that, I noticed  Old glancing at him, and there was a look in his eyes that was so big and so sad, I almost went and hugged him.) 
‘Well then,’ Kate replied, ‘lucky thing I won’t have to. , how many times?’ 
The s looked at each other. I knew the answer they were going to give. Never! That’s what they didn’t want to tell her. Maybe because they didn’t want to seem superior, or as though they were judging her, but if being the  counted for anything, I knew that— 
‘Once,’  the . 
The floor swayed at my feet. What did he say? 
‘Once,’ he repeated. It was the Bow Tie one talking. I wanted him to stop, because what he was saying could not be—could never ever be—true. ‘Once, long ago, I did exactly what you’re about to do now, and told myself it was okay.’ Stop talking, I wanted to scream, shut up, shut up, shut up. ‘It turned me into the man I am today. And I’m not even sure who that is any more.’ 
‘You tell yourself it was justified. All the time, every minute, you tell yourself that.’ It was  Converse now. He was all blurry, and my eyes were stinging. ‘But it’s a lie. What I did that day was wrong. Just wrong.’ 
I wiped my eyes on my sleeve. A few feet behind  Converse, I could see  Old. He had put a hand out to support himself on the wall, and his face was turned away. He looked weak suddenly, and I wondered if he was crying too. As I watched, he sort of crumpled into a chair, and held his head in his hand. Remember I  you could sort of tell he was the ? Well, it was strange, because suddenly that wasn’t true any more. 
‘So, anyway, here’s the point,’   Bow Tie. ‘Because I got it wrong, I’m going to make you get it right.’ Suddenly he was all lively again, like nothing he’d just  mattered. ‘How long have we got, ?’ 
‘Oh, about forty seconds, ,’   Converse. ‘Shall we get started straight away, or have a cuppa first?’ 
‘Nah, let’s get it done now, , we can spin it out to fill up the time.’ 
I looked at the clock. They didn’t have forty seconds, they had about thirty. Were they lying on purpose to make it more dramatic? 
‘Assets, ?’  Bow Tie. 
‘Well, incomparable genius, screwdrivers of varying sizes, and of course, the light fittings.’ 
‘Ah, yes, the amnesia light fittings. We can work with that, can’t we, ?’ 
‘I should say so, !’ 
Oh, try hard and remember this bit, Petronella. In exact unison, like they’d been practising, they pulled out two chairs at the end of the table, sat themselves down, banged their feet, one at a time, on the table top, and then leaned back and beamed at us all. The clock on the wall kept flicking the time away, and they were deliberately wasting it, just to show off. It was so ‘’ I almost forgot about what they’d just told us. 
Across the table, the two Kates were staring at each other, as if they each expected the other to do something about this, but neither had a clue what. 
‘Now then!’   Bow Tie. ‘Let us tell you what’s about to happen.’ 
Kate stepped forward, like she wanted to protest, but couldn’t think of anything to say. 
‘Any second now, you’re going to stop that countdown, both of you, together!’   Converse. 
Copy Kate stepped forward too, but nothing came out her mouth either. 
‘And then you’re going to negotiate the most perfect treaty of all time.’ 
‘Safeguards all round, completely fair on both sides.’ 
‘And the key to the perfect negotiation …’ 
‘… is not knowing what side you’re on.’ 
They slammed back their chairs, and then they both leapt up onto the table. They spun their screwdrivers in their hands, then aimed them at the light fittings. 
The Kates looked at each other, bewilderment in their faces. 
‘For the next few hours …’ 
‘… until we decide to let you out of here …’ 
‘… no one in this room will be able to remember …’ 
‘… if they’re human …’ 
‘… or if they’re Zygon.’ 
Both screwdrivers buzzed, and both s laughed. 
It was such a funny thing, because nothing really seemed to happen. The lights just got brighter for a moment, everything went a bit milky, and suddenly there we all were, just standing like we had before. For a moment, I wondered if something had gone wrong. But when I looked at you, I realised I couldn’t remember which of us was which. (It’s an odd feeling, writing this— remembering not remembering.) One of us was a Zygon and one of us was a human—but I didn’t know who was who, and I could tell, by the look in your eyes, you didn’t know either. Then we both looked to the timer on the wall, just as it clicked to zero. 
‘Cancel the detonation!’ shouted two Kates at once. 
The next few hours were as strange as you can imagine. You must have bits and pieces of it in your head, I would think. The two s prowled around like prison warders, as all six of us sat at that table, and oh, how we negotiated. The  was right, of course: if you’re given the job of dividing something in half, but aren’t told which half you’re going to end up with, you make an extra special effort to get it right. He knew we were only cruel because we were selfish and afraid—so he used our fear and selfishness to force us to be kind. 
Now and then I’d see one of the s pause by a shelf, and pocket something, or zap it with a screwdriver, or pull out a power pack. I wondered if the Black Archive would ever be quite such a problem again. 
The other , the old man, just stayed where he’d crumpled into his seat, his head still in his hand. He glanced at me once, and I swear his eyes were wet. Which one was he? Where did he come in the numbering? 
We had a chat, you and I, during one of the breaks, and I suppose that’s really what I want to talk about. I was saying that if I was a Zygon with an active hologram shell, did that mean my shoes were holograms, and if so, how did I clean them, and what if I picked up the wrong pair at the bowling alley. You laughed, and the laugh turned into the dreaded wheeze. I reached for my inhaler, and passed it to you. And we both froze, of course. Because that meant I was the human one, and you were the Zygon, and the secret was out. I wondered if everything was going to fall apart in that moment. But you just smiled, pressed your finger to your lips, and took my inhaler. It was rather fun to save the world together, over something so small and silly. 
‘You look a bit sad,’ I , a few minutes later. ‘At least I think that’s my sad face. Is that my sad face?’ 
‘I like being you,’ you , with one of my shrugs, when I’m trying to say I’m basically fine but I’m really not. ‘I suppose I’m going to have to stop now.’ 
And that’s when I realised something very important. Oh, Petronella! We are not the same! 
You just stirred and mumbled there. I don’t think you’ll be asleep much longer, so I’d better hurry up and get this written. Once we’d hammered out a sort of treaty—ten hours, it took—the s zapped the lights again, to restore our memories. This time, it knocked us all out, and I’m afraid (no offence) the humans all got better quicker than the Zygons. So here I am, writing by your bedside. 
I learned a lot today, Petronella. The  has always been my hero, but it’s silly and wrong to expect him to be a hero every day, because that’s not the truth about him. Just as I know I can never be with McGillop, because he thinks I’m a princess and that’s not the truth about me either. I’ve never understood why people want to be loved like that, because you’re bound to be a disappointment in the end. But if we’re not heroes, or princesses, I suppose we can do a bit better with what we’ve got, can’t we? 
I  we’re not the same. Here’s why. All my life, every day, I’ve wished I was someone else. I’ve wanted to be Kate, or Sarah Jane Smith, or Amy Pond, or anyone really. But you’re a shape-shifter, you’ve been lots of other people—and you want to be me. I think that makes you a much better Petronella Osgood than I am. 
I think I’d like to be a better version. If the  can’t always be a hero, we’re going to need a few more, right? 
Dearest Petronella, if you like being me, why not just carry on? Stay. Please stay, be my friend and teach me, if you can, how to be you. 
All my love, 
Petronella Osgood (well, one of them) 
FEED CONNECTING 
FEED CONNECTED 

FEED STABLE 
PLEASE DO NOT LEAVE THIS BOOK UNDER YOUR BED AS IT GETS HUNGRY AT NIGHT. 
There is a saying that if the ravens ever the leave the Tower of London, then England will fall. Lot of nonsense, of course. And anyway the real ones left ages ago. I’m afraid the ones there now are robot replicas. (Sorry, the tourist board asked me, and semi-retirement gets boring now and then.) But never mind birds—excellent theoretical physicists though they are—what about Osgoods? Since that day there have been two Petronella Osgoods on duty at the Tower, keeping the world safe. I truly think humanity might fall if either were to leave. 
Serious students will know (and if you do not, it is my sadness to inform you) that one of the Petronellas died in the line of duty a few years later. No one has ever known which of them perished, and Petronella herselves is quite firm about never telling anyone. I say ‘herselves’ because another Earth resident Zygon took the fallen Petronella’s place, so that there could be two of them again. 
All that matters is this: Osgood lives—and so long as the fangirls stand guard on the gates of humanity, so will we. 
To this day, there are Zygons living among the humans, in peace—and, it must be admitted, in secrecy. Not ideal, but better than fighting. And Kate Lethbridge-Stewart finally has some first-class holiday cover. The Zygons find her a bit exhausting, though, and take it in turns to be her. The important thing is, you can never see any difference in the handwriting! 
We now approach Chapter 
Seven. I hope that this volume so far has given you the skills you need to grapple with the questions of authorship you are about to encounter, as you embark on The Day of the . 
(As usual, I’ll be here when you’re finished. And keep the noise down when you’re reading, I’m trying to wire up my webcam. With any luck, I’ll have a special treat for you.) 
Chapter 7 

The Day of the  

At the table, negotiations had entered their ninth hour, and both Kates looked ready to flop face down. Clara noticed that the Osgoods were taking a break with each other, and appeared to be sharing the same inhaler, which surely presaged well for peace on Earth. The two younger (older?) s were wandering about the shelves, fiddling with things, and occasionally gossiping about some photographs of their various companions which they’d found pinned to a noticeboard. There had been an ugly period when they discovered a VHS tape of the movie Daleks: Invasion Earth and had insisted on watching it. They nearly derailed the negotiations by shouting, cheering and joining in, and then had spent the next hour calling each other Dr Who and talking like Peter Cushing. Clara had a sinking feeling that her  might stick that way. ‘I love his bandy legs!’ he’d , imitating Dr Who’s walk by making no apparent change at all. 
‘I can tell!’  the other one. 
‘How?’ 
When they’d found a DVD of the other movie (‘Remastered!’) they’d tried to get the old man to join in, but he’d smiled, and waved them away. 
Clara frowned, thinking of the smile. You can only really tell how sad someone is when they smile, she reflected. So as the ninth hour began, she made a cup of tea and went to sit with him. 
‘You’ve been peeking inside my head again,’ she . 
‘I’m terribly sorry, yes, I have,’ I replied. ‘I will stop immediately, you must forgive me. Please understand, I would never look at anything personal.’ 
‘I know,’ she shrugged. ‘My  does it too, sometimes. Usually in a crisis, though. Why were you doing it?’ 
‘I was looking for the ,’ I admitted. ‘I wanted to understand him.’ 
‘But you are the .’ 
No, I’m not, I wanted to tell her. Instead, I , ‘I came here to discover the man I would become. I found him in your mind.’ 
‘So that’s what this is all about? That’s why you showed up?’ 
‘Well done, yes. The boys seem to have forgotten to ask that question. The disadvantage of their permanent sugar high, one imagines.’ 
Clara smiled. ‘It was the movies that did it. I think they’re on the phone to Peter Cushing now, pitching a third one.’ 
‘I think my future selves crave distraction from memories they cannot lose.’ 
‘I know they do,’ she replied. ‘Mine does, anyway. I’ve always known that.’ She cocked her head at me, as if weighing up the words she was about to say. Then she hesitated. 
‘Is there a problem?’ I asked her. 
‘The —my —he’s always talking about the day he did it. The day he wiped out the Time Lords to stop the war.’ 
‘One would,’ I nodded, a little evasive. How could I tell her I knew nothing of the ’s regret, because it was all in my future? How could I explain that this was still the last day of the Time War, and the murder of 2.47 billion children still lay ahead of me. She was staring at me now. If I’d looked inside her mind then, I think I’d have seen only my own thoughts, so intently was she studying my face. 
‘You wouldn’t,’ she  at last. ‘Because you haven’t done it yet; it’s still in your future.’ 
It seemed to me, for a moment, there was only Clara Oswald in the world, and that everything around her was falling into darkness. 
‘You’re very sure of yourself,’ I , and wished the same could be  of me. 
‘He regrets it,’ she . ‘I see it in him every day, he’d do anything to change it.’ 
‘Including saving all these people,’ I . ‘How many worlds has his regret saved, do you think? Look over there. Zygons and humans, working together in peace. That is the ’s regret in action. That is the penance I will serve, and the saving of so many.’ 
There were lights around her now, but not the lights of the Black Archive. Instead, dimly at first, I saw shafts of sunlight slanting through cracks in an old barn wall. I’m ready, I thought. I am ready for this. 
‘How did you know?’ I asked her. 
Clara seemed to be squinting at me now, as if I was becoming harder to see. ‘Your eyes,’ she . ‘You’re so much younger.’ And the barn grew brighter, and though she didn’t move, Clara seemed further and further away. 
‘Then all things considered, it’s time I grew up,’ I . 
Clara raised her hand as if to grab hold of me and stop me leaving. ‘Don’t,’ she , and was gone. 
The heat of the barn closed round me, and the box that would slaughter the children of Gallifrey was again at my feet. There was something new on top of it. I stood in the baking air and the drone of the flies, and stared at the new addition. 
‘Well,’  the Interface in my ear, ‘you wanted a big red button.’ 
I have no idea how long I stood there. An hour perhaps. Or a minute, or a day. Time takes on a different meaning when it is measured in the heartbeats of the billions you are about to destroy. 
The Interface stood across from me, and I could have been mistaken but there seemed to be compassion in her eyes. Could the control interface of the deadliest weapon in the universe truly have compassion? 
‘One big bang,’ she was saying. ‘No more Daleks, no more Time Lords. Are you sure?’ 
‘I was sure when I first came here. I am sure now,’ I . ‘There is no other way.’ 
‘You saw the men you will become.’ 
‘Yes, I did.’ I thought about it for a moment. ‘And they were extraordinary,’ I continued, suddenly realising it was true. ‘They were brave and kind and brilliant, and everything they needed to be.’ 
‘They were you.’ 
I shook my head. ‘No. They are the .’ 
‘Don’t you understand, even now?’ Was it possible for a weapon interface to get impatient? ‘You’re the  too!’ 
‘No,’ I told her. ‘Great men are forged in fire. It is the privilege of lesser men to light the flame.’ I raised my hand to the big red button. ‘Whatever the cost.’ 
I thought of the children all over Gallifrey. I hoped it would be quick, and they wouldn’t be afraid. 
‘Before you do this,’ she , ‘I want you to swear something.’ 
‘Swear what?’ I . What could matter now? 
‘You know the sound that the TARDIS makes, when it lands? That wheezing, groaning?’ 
‘Yes.’ 
‘I love it. Don’t you.’ 
‘Of course I love it.’ 
‘Then swear this,’ she , taking my hand. ‘Swear that wherever that sound is heard, it will bring hope.’ 
‘I swear it.’ 
Her grip on my hand was tighter now. ‘No, swear it and mean it. Swear that anyone, anywhere, who hears that sound will turn and look, and know they’re not alone.’ 
I smiled at the thought. It was such a good dream. I could hear the TARDIS engines roaring in my head. The , in the TARDIS, riding through the stars to the rescue. I could never be that man, of course, but I could set him on his way. 
‘I swear it. I swear on both my hearts, and all my lives, that whoever hears that sound will know they are not alone.’ 
She smiled. ‘I believe you. And I know you mean it. And above all, I know you will keep your word. So, my dear little breakable mortal … you have earned this.’ 
‘Earned what?’ 
She leaned towards me, and her voice was a whisper. ‘Turn, ,’ she , ‘turn and look.’ 
I turned. I fear, in that moment, my eyes were hot, and my face was wet. I confess I may have trembled. 
The sound of the TARDIS engines had not been in my head: not one, but two, beautiful, blue police boxes stood at the other end of the barn, and in front of each box, stood a man who was also me. 
It was the last day of the Time War. It was the worst day of my life. But I was not alone. 
That moment seemed to turn and hold in the air, and I stood frozen, unable to speak. Then Clara Oswald came bounding out of the TARDIS. ‘You see, I told you,’ she , ‘he hasn’t done it yet!’ 
Her voice broke my trance. I cleared my throat, and hoped my disarray was not obvious. ‘Gentlemen, your presence is appreciated, and your support more so. But this is for me, and for me alone. Return to your appointed times and places, with my every blessing.’ 
It was the kind of request I’d ignored all my life—and now I learned I was always going to. 
‘These events should be time-locked,’  the one in the suit. ‘We shouldn’t have been able to come here.’ 
‘So something let us through,’  the one in the Bow Tie. 
‘Clever boys, aren’t they?’ whispered the Interface in my ear. ‘Don’t worry, they can’t see me—they’d be very confused if they could. Especially Pinstripe.’ 
Pinstripe, I thought! Bow Tie and Pinstripe, that worked. In other circumstances I might have laughed, but instead I turned my back on them both. If they couldn’t remember the fear I was feeling now, I didn’t want to remind them by letting them see my face. 
‘Go,’ I . ‘Go back to your lives. Go and be the  I could never be. Make it worthwhile.’ I placed my hand on the button. It was time for them to go, and I knew they wouldn’t want to stay and witness this. 
For a moment, there was no movement behind me. Then I heard them both approaching. 
‘All those years, burying you in my memory,’  Pinstripe. 
‘Pretending you didn’t exist,’  Bow Tie. ‘Keeping you a secret, even from myself.’ 
‘Pretending you weren’t the , when you were the  more than anybody else.’ 
‘You were the  on the day it wasn’t possible to get it right.’ 
They were either side of me now, with the box between them. I couldn’t look either of them in the face, so I kept my eyes on my hand, resting on the button. 
‘But this time …’  Pinstripe, as his hand appeared and rested on top of mine. 
‘… you don’t have to do it alone,’ completed Bow Tie, as his hand came to rest on top of the other two. 
I should have told them to run. I should have ordered them to get away from this place, and leave me to my duty. But I was old and tired, and about to kill billions. 
So all I  was, ‘Thank you.’ 
I looked to the Interface, and saw she was staring at me. It was impossible, of course, but it seemed to me there were tears in her eyes. For a moment, I could see nothing except her face. 
Many years later, wearing a brand new body, I met Rose Tyler and wondered, for a long time, why her face haunted me. 
Later still, I found myself trapped on Floor 500 of the Game Station, as the Dalek Emperor mocked me. ‘Are you coward or killer?’ it had demanded. I thought about the barn, and what I had done that day—and then I stepped away from the levers that would have unleashed death on Daleks and humans alike. ‘Coward,’ I , ‘any day.’ I remembered the big red button under my hand, and wept, because I knew it hadn’t always been true. 
On the planet Messaline, I held a gun to the head of a murderer, as my daughter lay dead by his hand, and then spared his life. ‘I never would,’ I told him. ‘Do you get that? I never would!’ 
I’m the man who never would, I told them all, but I knew I was the man who had. 
So many years passed, and in time I found myself back in that barn, trapped again in the last day of the Time War. I laid my hand over the hand of the man I’d once been. I remembered being a coward not a killer, I thought of being the man who never would. And then I , ‘What we do today, is not out of fear, or hatred—it is done because there is no other way.’ And as I  it, I still knew it to be true. Despite everything I’d ever done, or tried to believe, there was still no other way. 
And then came Amy Pond and Rory. I escaped the Pandorica, and I fought the Silence. I discovered the true name of River Song, I met Clara Oswald, and I saw my grave on Trenzalore. I tried to be the coward, not the killer, and every day I told myself I was the man who never would. But I knew, in every moment, I was lying—because the man I was had stood in a barn, twice over, and made a terrible mistake. 
Centuries passed, and I was back in that barn for the third time. Again, I laid my hand over the hand of the man I’d once been. I took a breath, I prepared myself, and I : ‘This is done without joy or triumph, in the name of the many lives we are failing to save.’ 
We looked at each over the gap of the centuries, and nodded. We were ready. We were making a mistake—but there was no other way, and there never had been. 
And then, for the second time that day, Clara Oswald , ‘Don’t.’ 
She was staring at me, tearful now. As if tears could make a difference on a day like this. 


